DSA And Big 0 notations

What is a Data Struture?
A way of organising and storing data in memory. 

They are broadly classified into 2 types
1.) Linear Data structures -> Arrays,Stacks,Ques and linked lists
2.) Non Linear Data structures -> trees and graphs

Linear Data structures:

Arrange data in sequential or linear manner.Each element is attached to its previous and next adjacent element.
There are mainly 2 types
1.) Static data structures
It has a fixed Memory size.
2.) Dynamic data structures
Size of the memory can change can change dynamically at run time.They are efficient in memory when compared to static data structures.

The elements are present in the same level allows travering in a single run.
The time complexity increases with as size of data increases.

Non Linear Data Structures:
The data is arranged in a hierarchial order. Due to this they cannot be traversed in one run. The time complextity is the same always.

Advantages:
a.) Language independent
b.) Improved logic building
c.) Improved problem solving approach
d.) Enabled real world problem solving approach
e.) helps in writing optimised compared
f.) Adaptibility to emerging tech Stacks


Common data operations
Insertion: Inserting an element to a data structures
Deletion: Deleting an element to a data structure
Searching: Searching an element in a data structure
Traveral: Travering all the elements in a data structure
Sorting: Arrange the element in an order
Merging: Combining to similiar data structures


Abstract data types
There are data structures that are define the decalartion of data and Operations but not how they are implemented.
eg:- Array, Linked list, stack, queue , tree and graphs

Algorithm
Step by step procedure to solve a problem
2 main criteria:
1.) effectiveness -> no of steps to solve a problem
2.) efficiency -> less time taken and memory to solve the problem

Analysis of an Algorithm helps determine the space and time consumption to execute it. It helps to predict the behaviour of Algorithm without actually implementing it in code.

Type of analysis:
Asymtotic analysis:
Way of understanding how an Algorithm behaves or performs with change in size.

Asymtotic notations:
There are 3 types namely
1.) Big-O notations -> worst case scenario and the upper bound of the alogorithm
2.) Omega notations -> Best case scenario and the lower bound of the algorithm
3.) Theta notations -> Average case scenario  and upper and lower bound of the algorithm


Big-O notations:
1.) O(1) -> constant -> always same amount of time
eg: Accessing an element in an array.
2.) O(N) -> linear -> directly proptional to size of data
eg: Linear search
3.) O(logn) -> Logarithemic -> complexity growa linearly as input size grows
eg:Binary search
4.) O(nlogn) -> Linear arithmetic -> complexity will grow between linear and Exponential
eg: Heap sort, merge sort
5.) O(n pow c) -> quadratic or cubic ->directly proptional to the square of the input size
eg: Bubble sort,search sort,inseration sort and bucket sort
6.) O(c pow n) -> Exponential -> time taken becomes double with each increase of input size
eg: fibbanocci number, tower of hanoi
7.) O(n!) -> factorial -> grows Exponentially with increased size of input
eg: permutaions on a string, bute force search.


Multiple runtime complexity
While combining multiple runtime complexities, it takes the worst runtime complexity as its runtime complexity;
eg: O(n) + O(n2) = O(n2);

Problem solving techniques:
1.) Single and nested loops
2.) Decrease and conquer, divide and conquer and transfer and conquer.
3.) Binary search
4.) BFS AND DFS (Breadth and depth)
5.) 2 pointer and sliding window
6.) Data structures
7.) Dynamic Programming
8.) Greedy algoritms
